Hippopotami are among the largest living land mammals, being only smaller than elephants and some rhinoceroses.
Common hippos are recognisable by their barrel-shaped torsos, wide-opening mouths revealing large canine tusks, nearly hairless bodies, columnar legs and large size; adults average 1,500 kg (3,310 lb) and 1,300 kg (2,870 lb) for males and females respectively. Despite its stocky shape and short legs, it is capable of running 30 km/h (19 mph) over short distances.
Hippopotami have barrel-shaped bodies with short legs and long muzzles.[26] Their skeletal structures are graviportal,[7]:8 adapted to carrying their enormous weight, and their specific gravity allows them to sink and move along the bottom of a river.[27] Hippopotamuses have small legs (relative to other megafauna) because the water in which they live reduces the weight burden.[28] Though they are bulky animals, hippopotamuses can gallop at 30 km/h (19 mph) on land but normally trot.
They are incapable of jumping but do climb up steep banks.[26] Despite being semiaquatic and having webbed feet, an adult hippo is not a particularly good swimmer nor can it float. It is rarely found in deep water; when it is, the animal moves by porpoise-like leaps from the bottom.
The eyes, ears, and nostrils of hippos are placed high on the roof of their skulls. This allows these organs to remain above the surface while the rest of the body submerges.[29]:259 The testes of the males descend only partially and a scrotum is not present. In addition, the penis retracts into the body when not erect. The genitals of the female are unusual in that the vagina is ridged and two large diverticula protrude from the vulval vestibule. The function of these is unknown.
Unlike most other semiaquatic animals, the hippopotamus has very little hair.[29]:260 The skin is 6 cm (2 in) thick,[26] providing it great protection against conspecifics and predators. By contrast, its subcutaneous fat layer is thin.[7]:3 The animals' upper parts are purplish-gray to blue-black, while the under parts and areas around the eyes and ears can be brownish-pink.[29]:260 Their skin secretes a natural sunscreen substance which is red-coloured.
